afternoon and welcome to Downing Street
for the daily coronavirus briefing I'm
joined by Professor John Newton test and
trace coordinator before I provide an
update on the work that we're doing to
combat corona virus I'd like to update
you on the latest figures in total three
million six hundred and eighty one
thousand two hundred and ninety five
tests have been carried out in the UK
including a hundred and nine thousand
nine hundred and seventy nine yesterday
two hundred and sixty five thousand two
hundred and twenty seven people have
tested positive that's an increase of
two thousand and four cases since
yesterday sadly of those who've tested
positive for corona virus across all
settings thirty seven thousand and forty
eight people have now died yesterday
across the UK a hundred and thirty-four
deaths were reported but for the first
time since the 18th of March
I am very encouraged to confirm that
yesterday there were no deaths from
corona virus recorded in Northern
Ireland I want to pay tribute to Robin
Swan my opposite number and all those
across the NHS and public health in
Northern Ireland and the people of
Northern Ireland who have shown such
resolve to be able to bend the curve
down and thank them for the work that
they've done while the news may not be
this positive every day I look forward
very much to working with them to keep
the virus under control
in Northern Ireland today's figures from
the Office for National Statistics show
across the UK as a whole the lowest
number of deaths from corona virus for
six weeks this is a national endeavor
and whatever the headwinds as a country
we can't let up on this we're past the
peak we're flattening the curve we
protected the NHS the number of deaths
is falling we must keep our resolve
and I also want to say a massive thank
you to everybody over the bank holiday
weekend who stuck to the social
distancing rules and especially to my
colleagues in the NHS and in social care
who are doing so much even though we're
past the peak there are still 8802
people in hospital with coronavirus in
the UK and there is still 98 NHS
colleagues in hospital with coronavirus
including some who are seriously ill so
we must maintain our focus and there's
two areas that I'd like to provide an
update on today both incredibly
important for the future of tackling
this disease PPE and treatments first
we've been working hard to build our
supplies of personal protective
equipment I know how important this is
especially to colleagues on the
frontline we all heard in the early
weeks of the crisis the calls from the
frontline for more and better PPE and we
all saw the global scramble to acquire
it I have been completely open about the
scale and the difficulties of this
challenge building a new supply chain
from scratch and of course the
operational challenge of delivery
General Sir Nick Carter chief of the
Defence Staff said himself this is the
single greatest logistical challenge
that he'd faced in his 40 years of
service and in response to those
challenges thanks to the Armed Forces
and to so many others including so many
in the NHS we've seen a mammoth effort
we've ramped up domestic production I
can announce that we have now signed
contracts to manufacture two billion
items of PPE here in the UK I set a
national challenge and I'm absolutely
delighted that Lord Dayton has stepped
up and is helping us to deliver against
it around the world we've signed deals
with over a hundred new suppliers
including agreeing contracts for a
further three point seven billion gloves
while we continue to improve the
logistics and work hard to get everyone
the people
you that they need these new supplies
mean that we're not simply keeping up
with demand we are now able to begin to
replenish our stockpiles there is a lot
further to go on PPE as on so many
things but we have made significant
progress and I'd like to thank everybody
involved and PEEPi of course is so
important because it's about protecting
the people who protect us and we'll do
that for as long as the virus remains on
these shores the next thing I wanted to
update you on is some of the remarkable
R&D into treatments that's taking place
across the UK one of Britain's greatest
strengths is our life sciences and in
particular our life sciences research
and we're leading the world in the
clinical trials that are being done here
as I said at this podium last week the
very nature of scientific inquiry means
that not every project will bear fruit
but I'm determined that we'll explore
every possible Avenue the recovery trial
is the world's largest trial of
potential coronavirus treatments and
because our NHS is a universal system in
which we're all part of we have some of
the best data and can do some of the
best research today I can announce that
we're beginning a new trial for selected
NHS patients of an antiviral drug called
REM des aveer they've already been some
promising early results on coronavirus
patients with early data suggesting it
can shorten recovery time by around four
days as you can understand
we'll be prioritizing the use of this
treatment where it will provide the
greatest benefit this is probably the
biggest step forward in the treatment of
coronavirus since the crisis began these
are very early steps but we're
determined to support the science and
back the projects that show promise I'd
like to thank the NHS the MHRA
that devolved administration's because
this is uk-wide
and Gilead the pharmaceutical company
for their work in making it happen after
all it's worth remembering that in the
battle against this virus we are all on
the same side so we'll keep working
across the world to develop the vaccines
and the treatments like this that will
help us turn a corner but until a
treatment or a vaccine comes good there
is no simple way to defeat the virus so
we must not lose our resolve so please
stay alert control the virus and save
lives I'll now turn to Professor Newton
to take us through the slides thank you
very much secretary of state the first
slide shows changes in transport use in
the country and the top three refer to
motor vehicle transport cars like goods
vehicles and heavy goods vehicles and we
can see there that there's a small trend
upwards in all three which is more or
less what we'd expect commensurate with
the advice that has been given to people
to start to return to work and of course
for heavy goods vehicles the fact that
many businesses have been continuing to
deliver the essential items to us
throughout the lock down the slides
below show use of public transport
national rail transport in London buses
and cheap and then buses outside London
and there the trend is really very flat
showing really no increase in the use of
those of public transport recently the
next slide shows numbers of tests and
numbers of confirmed cases and our
sector state mentioned the latest number
is hundred and nine thousand of very
nearly hundred and ten thousand and a
total of 3.6 million tests the numbers
of tests fluctuate that's partly because
we are sending out large volumes of
tests on certain days to perform
large-scale population surveys so the
fact that the test numbers fluctuate is
to be expected the graph below shows
numbers of confirmed cases and again as
Secretary State mentioned the latest
figure is 2004 and that also fluctuates
somewhat but there's a 7-day rolling
which trend which is clearly downwards
which is encouraging it's important to
understand that the number 2004 is an
underestimate of the total number of
cases in the country because of course
not every case that develops is tested
or presents for symptoms but it's a good
indication of the overall trend turning
them to the situation in our hospitals
the first slide shows the number of
admissions to hospital with kovat and
there we have a number of 471 which is
down from 639 and in fact that's the
lowest number recorded since we started
collecting these data on the 20th of on
the 20th of March so that is good news
and within Hospital in our ITU Ward's 11
percent of beds with mechanical
ventilators are now occupied by cave
with 19 patients and that again shows a
steady downward trend in that proportion
turning them to people in hospital
around the country we can see the
different graphs for the different
regions of England and for the different
countries of the UK and a number of
things are apparent from this firstly
that the impact has been very different
in different parts of the country with a
much larger peak in London also in the
northwest in the Midlands but all of
these areas show a decline and so there
are fewer people in hospital now in
total 8802 which is down from 10,000 118
this time last week so again a steady
although slow decline which is seen all
over the country sadly people are still
dying from coronavirus and 134 deaths is
the latest figure this is a relatively
low figure compared to previous days if
we look at this graph and we have to
bear in mind that there is always a
weekend effect and in this in the case
of this figure a bank holiday effect but
nevertheless the 7-day rolling average
does show a steady
in the number of daily deaths total
deaths recorded with a positive test is
now 37,000 and 48 we turn to the next
slide we have additional information on
deaths from Co vyd from the Office for
National Statistics and from death
registrations and here the number is
higher it's forty five thousand two
hundred and thirty-one which are deaths
registered in the UK where Kovac 19 was
mentioned on the death certificate so
not all of these cases will have had a
positive effect and the figure to
compare it with directly is thirty three
thousand nine hundred and ninety eight
on the 15th of May when those were the
numbers of deaths with a positive test
so there is a there is a difference the
graph on the top of the slide shows that
gap between the numbers of registered
deaths from kovat and the numbers of
confirmed deaths and we can see that the
gap is narrowing but also we can see
that the there is a bank holiday effect
on the numbers of death registrations as
well and the graph below shows again
from Office for National Statistics data
the differences in numbers of deaths by
place of death and this shows the
numbers of deaths occurring in hospitals
and the numbers in care homes both of
those are declining that the trend the
trend in deaths in care homes occurred
rather later and was smaller but both
are now declining and in total twenty
eight twenty eight point three percent
of cases related deaths have occurred in
care homes thank you very much thanks
very much indeed so the first question
is from a member of the public and just
to remind everybody we don't see these
questions in advance in the same way
that we obviously don't see the
questions from journalists in advance so
the first question is from Martin from
Brighton I'm going to be on the video
good afternoon
will the government review all penalty
fines imposed on families travelling for
child care purposes during lockdown
thanks
well Thank You Martin the that's a very
good question and we do understand the
impact and the need for making sure that
children get adequate childcare that is
one of the significant concerns that
we've had all the way through this and
so I think especially coming from a man
of the cloth I think that is a perfectly
reasonable to take away that question I
have to talk to my Treasury colleagues
before I can answer it in full and we'll
look at it and I we can get your your
your details we'll make sure that we
write you with a full answer and make an
announcement from this podium I think we
can make that commitment Thank You
Martin the next question is from Ellie
from Kent and the question is if people
can start to shop for unassign shil
items and kids can go back to school
when we don't know where those people
have been why can't we visit another
household who we know have been self
isolating such as grandparents and
partners and Ellie this is an incredibly
important question and I entirely
understand where you're coming from on
this and and one of the most natural
instincts is to see people who you know
and love and and one of the challenges
is that it's very difficult to know
where the virus has passed from and to
we are on the 1st of June proposing to
make a series of changes including in
from the middle of June starting to open
up
non-essential retail and from the 1st of
June having some school schools accept
children in reception year all schools
accept children in reception year year
one and you yes six but as you say
there's also a yearning to see people in
another household and we are looking at
how we can make this happen in a safe
way John well yes thank you sector
estate I mean the issue here is all
about risks
and we know that if social distancing
measures are being implemented well as
they are I think very widely in places
like supermarkets and risk is really
quite low
we know the highest risk of transmission
is within households so peope the people
you are most likely to infect and other
people in your own household and so
that's why the advice has to be
different for meeting people in
households compared to other places but
the the the gradual increase in contact
is what will get us all back to normal
but we do have to bear in mind that
everything we do has risk attached to it
and the objective is to reduce that risk
as much as possible fantastic thank you
very much Ellie
next question is from Laura Koons burg
of the BBC Laura thank you very much
health secretary and nearly 40 of your
colleagues believes that the Prime
Minister's top advisor let the country
down and what him gone given that you
stood there at that lectern and told
people the guidelines weren't advice
they were instructions do you feel that
way or at least see why your colleagues
do too
well thank you Laura and on this
question mr. Cummings has set out all of
the details in a quite extensive detail
yesterday and then invited questions on
it my view is that what he did was
within the guidelines I can understand
why reasonable people can take a
different view but my judgment which is
the same as the Prime Minister's
judgment is that what mr. Cummings did
was within the guidelines and after all
the guidelines allow for exceptional
circumstances particularly with regard
to child care and if you are and and and
we've stated before that if you're
unable to look after a small child that
is an exceptional circumstance so I
think that within the guidelines
mr. Cummings acted and the the most
important thing is that we can we can
get on and deal with the other issues
for instance those that I've talked
about today on PPE and on treatments but
health secretary do you add
myth but it's doing damage to the
government's credibility and maybe
undermining the message I mean you've
just there at that lecture and said
after a question from a member of the
public that you might review some of the
finds that have been given to people if
they were traveling for a reasons to do
with their children this is making a
difference is it not - what you're
trying to do in government no I actually
think that it's incredibly important
that people keep their resolve as we can
see from the the falling number of
deaths the falling number of hospital
admissions and as we stand up the
increased test and trace capability I
think it's incredibly important that as
a nation we keep our resolve everybody
has a part to play in this and everybody
needs to need to act in a way that's
responsible both for them and to for
their community and I think that I think
that I do think that's important and I
think it's important that we all stick
at it thanks very much
Robert Peston from ITV Secretary of
State
you and your wife tested positive for
Cobras 19 you have three young children
but you chose to stay at home in London
what is the relevant difference between
you and Dominic Cummings the relevant
difference Robert is that we had
childcare readily available at home and
mr. Cummings didn't thanks very much
then can Tish from LBC Thank You
Secretary of State House secretary 71
percent of people disagree with you and
the prime minister they think Dominic
Cummings did break the rules and because
of that confidence in the government has
plummeted 20 points in just four days
given how important that confidence is
to pretty much everything you are trying
to do from maintaining social distancing
to reopening the economy and getting
people back to work and the track and
trace system that you're introducing
next week how much does that apparent
loss of people's confidence worry you
and what do you say to those who say
simply that means you are risking
people's health and the health of the
economy all people think to save one
number 10 advisor what would you say
well of course I understand the anger
that some people feel and I regret the
anger that some people feel and mr.
Cummings himself said that with
hindsight he should have got all these
the facts out earlier and what I say is
that it's incredibly important that as a
country we focus on our on what we need
to do now and I said this repeatedly
through this crisis you've got to wake
up every day and work out what is the
best thing to do next and making sure
for instance that we have the PPE
available and that we protect people on
the front line making progress on these
treatments as I talked about these are
the critical next steps that we need to
take along with as you said making
changes to the social distancing rules
to allow people to get back to doing
some of the things that they love if you
look at the earlier question from Ellie
from Kent it's all about how do we get
back to a position where I can I can see
my loved ones these are the sorts of
things that the country is yearning for
and I'm not under playing the importance
of the the debate that there's been and
as I've said entirely reasonable that
reasonable people can disagree with over
what happened over the description of
what happened over the weekend but I'm
here to focus on and really drive
forward all of the other important
things that we need to do as well thanks
very much
said pain from the FT thank you very
much mr. Hancock mr. Hancock as we've
just heard according to a poll conducted
today after that press conference 71
percent of the public said after hearing
mr. Cummings his versions of the events
they believe his drive to dump broke the
lockdown rules you've just said that it
didn't are you saying the 71 percent of
the British public misunderstood those
rules and if so does that mean you as a
government and failed drafting them and
also if you don't mind me asking would
you now advise Britons to use that
discretion one interpreting the rules or
is that discretion just for people who
work in Downing Street no I I as I've
said it is incredibly important
that people follow the guidelines I was
actually standing at this podium when
the DC mo set out that clearly as she
put it clearly if you have a bolts who
are unable to look after a small child
that is an exceptional circumstance and
the guidelines were drafted with
exceptional circumstances in mind there
were other exceptional circumstances
that are set out that didn't don't apply
in this case
but describe some of the other
exceptional circumstances that people
face and the therefore I think it is
reasonable to conclude that the
description of events that mr. Cummings
put out yesterday was within the
guidelines but I also as I've said in
answer I think to the first question I
do think it that you know I understand
that reasonable people will disagree
with that and of course I understand
some of the some of the anger that
boiled up over the weekend thanks very
much Joe Murphy from the Evening
Standard Joe socialist a on Monday
there's going to be a major landmark
with the beginning of trust and trace
which will hopefully help beat this
virus while of reopening the economy
professor Newton as a noted
epidemiologist how important is it to
the success of this great project that
people are bathed the instructions
they're given by contact tracers to the
letter and to the spirit can they for
example follow their instincts to
interpret this guidance well if I answer
first and then alpha hand over to
Professor Newton the NHS tests and trace
program is going to be incredibly
important because as the Evening
Standard itself has set out the the the
whole purpose here is to try to move to
a system where we are have a more
targeted lockdown where if you're at
high risk because you've been in contact
with someone who's tested positive
you're asked to self isolate and also it
will give us the information to to have
local lock downs and focus on areas
where there me may may be flare-ups and
it is very important that people follow
those rules
and they should do it don't not do it
for for the government people need to do
this for themselves for their loved ones
for their communities it's incredibly
important and it will stop those local
flare-ups from happening John Thank You
secretary state yes so the test and
trace program is a very important
contribution it will allow us to control
the virus in different phase of the
pandemic while we are returning back to
normal but it's important to stress that
it has to be seen alongside other
measures such as continued social
distancing wherever we can and also
basic hygiene and all those things will
contribute because we know that no
country in the world that adopts tests
and trace we will not be able to find
every case and we will not be able to
trace every contact but your to your
points the program will give context
very clear instructions they will be
phrased as instructions rather than
advice and we do expect people to follow
them thank you
Thanks yes you're going to be asking
families to isolate for two weeks on the
say-so of an official even if they don't
have symptoms can you make that big ask
if the people who are writing the orders
aren't following them well as I said Joe
I think that it is incredibly important
that people play their part in the
testing trace system it will be somebody
from the NHS these are these are all
signed off by the NHS so people are
doing this you know they're not doing it
for facet for me people are doing this
for their loved ones if you're phoned up
and asked to self isolate even though
you're perfectly healthy because you've
been in close contact with somebody
who's tested positive then it seemed
it's your civic duty to then self
isolate for yourself for your community
for your family and we all need to come
together to do this and that will then
in turn allow us to lift some of the
measures that currently are blanket
measures across the whole of society and
have to be and have to be blanket
measures until we have the NHS tests and
tray system
up and running and in place so it is it
is very important and we're asking
people to do this for their community
and to ensure that there aren't those
local flare-ups that would then require
us to to take more specific targeted
action across a across a whole area for
instance across the whole town thanks
very much
finally Phil Coleman from the News and
star
we've lost Phil yes Phil good afternoon
Secretary of State sound professor
Newton and as we've heard already this
afternoon the impact of coronavirus has
varied considerably across the UK with
Cumbria among the hardest hit areas yet
local health leaders despite those
appearing to be past the first peak
genuinely fear a second wave of
infections and deaths potentially
fuelled by visitors flooding back to our
County primarily the Lake District which
last year saw 47 million visitors in a
County whose health system is designed
for half a million
so what tool will you give our local
officials the police or the health
officials unlike to manage any future
flare-ups Mike those tools include the
option of the temporary localized or
reach a lockdown and secondly you've
already mentioned mr. Hancock the the
vital importance of PPE how it protects
the people who protect us
sadly in Cumbria there have been
examples of frontline NHS staff who have
worked with PPE masks which were not
properly fit tested for a number of
weeks potentially putting those workers
at risk so what's your message to those
staff and how you ensure that they don't
face that risk again in the future
thanks Phil and I'll have a go at the
second question and and then Pastor John
for the for the first on PPE we have had
some problems of items that were in the
stockpile and were put in in the
stockpile some time ago
then we discovered on second checking
them that they didn't fit the
requirements and we then withdrew those
and we acted as fast as we could as soon
as we we knew that there was a problem
and we've therefore we've done the very
best we can to tackle that I'm told I'm
advised that the clinicians consider
that the risk was low because of the
especially the particular item that you
mentioned and these were only for use in
low-risk settings nevertheless I know
how important it is to get the right PPE
and so as soon as we found out about the
problem we put a stop to them going out
of the the warehouse and we let the
system know that there was a problem
with these items so what I'd say to
staff on the front line
yes course apologies the problem here
wasn't so much the kit that was adequate
quality it was the the delay in training
in in fit testing the people who were
all that kids to ensure that that kick
was properly airtight therefore it
appears to have been a systemic problem
got a problem with the actual kit so
again systems fails not kit right well
look I know that there were some
problems with that as well at the start
I hope we've resolved them now it was
all part of you know going from needing
normal amounts of PPE to needing very
high amounts of PPE and I will
personally make sure that the specific
example that you raise is looked into
and why don't we speak again once I've
been able to look into it and get you a
full answer on the on the second point I
know that there's been a specific
problem in terms of in terms of
flare-ups and in terms of the number of
cases particularly in barrow-in-furness
and I've been talking to the local MP
about this who's who's doing a brilliant
job and bringing matters to my attention
locally and the short answer is yes we
will have local lockdowns in future
where there are flare-ups and we have a
system that we're putting in place with
a combination
public health England and the new joint
biosecurity center along with the local
directors of public health who play an
absolutely crucial role in the
decision-making in this system to make
sure if there is a local flare-up we
have a local lockdown so local lock
downs will be part of the future system
that we've put in place as part of the
NHS test and trace system and that's the
short answer
professor Newton can give you the long
answer it's a pretty pretty good arm
pretty good answer I think the your your
question is a really good one because it
emphasizes the fact that whatever
measures we put in place have to work
everywhere in the country and all
different areas will have their own
different considerations the Lake
District is a very special place it has
a lot of visitors has a lot of open
spaces and it's difficult to reach parts
of it and but other parts of country
have different challenges so the
measures we're putting in place are a
mixture of national resources the test
and trace program is unprecedented in
its scale but works on the basis of
well-tried principles of public health
contact tracing it's supported by
technology a web-based function but also
as we will know there is an app in trial
in the Isle of Wight as well so there's
a national resource there's a regional
resource in the public health England's
health protection teams are available
and they are working I know already with
colleagues in Cumbria on the on the the
issue that secretary state mentioned and
then we have the local we have the local
resources we have local directs of
public health but actually the whole of
civic society needs to be involved in
coronavirus we're all affected by it
and in fact many different organisations
will be involved in helping us to
respond to it whether that's in local
councils who help with infection control
but also in supporting people who might
be self isolating and many other local
businesses who will need to use social
distancing to prevent infection but also
to respond when their employees are
asked to self isolate and support them
so it is a whole country effort it has a
national component but it has a very
important local component as well which
needs to reflect the things that you
described you know the special
characteristics of different parts of
the country thank you thanks very much
professor new
answer good enough for you thank you
thanks very much indeed
that concludes the coronavirus daily
briefing thanks very much indeed see the
headlines as they happen and watch BBC
news live in the app and get the full
story with BBC decoder UK forward slash
news follow the story for all the latest
with BBC News